README.md, before:

# Sign Language Translator

This project provides a sign language translation service using MediaPipe for keypoint extraction and a fine-tuned Whisper model deployed on Vertex AI. The service is deployed on Google Cloud Run and managed with Terraform.

## Documentation

- [Data Access and Dataset Information](app/docs/DATA.md)
- [Model Training Guide](app/docs/TRAINING.md)
- [Deployment Scenarios](app/docs/DEPLOYMENT.md)
- [GCP Project Setup Guide](app/docs/GCP_SETUP.md)

## Project Structure

```
sign-language-translator/
├── app/ # Application code
│ ├── config/ # Configuration files
│ ├── models/ # Model implementations
│ ├── scripts/ # Utility scripts
│ └── utils/ # Helper functions
├── terraform/ # Infrastructure as Code
│ ├── environments/ # Environment-specific configs
│ └── modules/ # Reusable Terraform modules
├── cloud-build/ # Cloud Build configurations
└── setup/ # Setup scripts
```

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.9+
  - Specific version requirements listed in requirements.txt
- Google Cloud SDK
  - Required permissions:
    - Organization viewer
    - Project creator
    - Billing account user
    - Service Account Admin
- Terraform >= 1.0.0
- Docker (optional for local container testing)
- Hugging Face account and access token (for production model)

For Linux users:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install python3-dev build-essential
```

## Environment Variables

Required environment variables:

- `PROJECT_ID`: Your Google Cloud project ID
- `REGION`: Default GCP region (e.g., europe-west3)
- `GITHUB_OWNER`: GitHub username or organization name
- `NOTIFICATION_EMAIL`: Email for monitoring alerts
- `USE_MOCK_MODEL`: Set to "true" for offline development
- `VERTEX_AI_ENDPOINT_ID`: Required when USE_MOCK_MODEL is "false"

## Development Setup

1. Initialize your development environment:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/sign-language-translator.git
cd sign-language-translator
# Run the development setup script
./setup/setup_dev_env.sh
```

2. Configure your environment:

```bash
# For offline development (using mock model)
export USE_MOCK_MODEL=true
# For online development (using Vertex AI)
export USE_MOCK_MODEL=false
export VERTEX_AI_ENDPOINT_ID=<your-endpoint-id>
```

3. Deploy a development model (if using Vertex AI):

```bash
python app/scripts/dev_model_deploy.py --project-id=your-project-id
```

4. Start the development server:

```bash
flask run --debug
```

## Deployment Scenarios

### Development

- Uses CPU-only resources
- Single replica deployment
- Mock model available for offline development
- Minimal compute resources for cost optimization

### Staging

- GPU-enabled endpoints
- Automated deployment via GitHub Actions
- Integration testing before promotion
- Scaled-down production configuration

### Production

- Full GPU resources
- Multiple replicas for high availability
- Automated canary deployments
- Full monitoring and alerting

## Model Deployment

### Development

```bash
# Deploy development model
python app/scripts/dev_model_deploy.py --project-id=your-project-id
```

### Staging/Production

```bash
# Tag a new model version
git tag model/v1.0.0
git push origin model/v1.0.0
# GitHub Actions will automatically:
# 1. Deploy to staging
# 2. Run validation tests
# 3. Deploy to production if tests pass
```

## Infrastructure Setup

1. Copy the example variables file:

```bash
cd terraform/environments/dev
cp example.tfvars terraform.tfvars
```

2. Edit terraform.tfvars with your values

```hcl
project_id = "your-project-id"
region = "europe-west3"
```

3. Initialize and apply Terraform:

```bash
terraform init
terraform apply
```

## Monitoring Setup

The project includes monitoring configurations for different environments:

### Development

- Basic resource monitoring
- Error rate tracking
- Performance metrics

### Production

- Full monitoring suite
- Custom alerts
- Uptime checks
- Error tracking
- Performance monitoring

Configure monitoring by setting up notification channels:

```bash
cd terraform/environments/[env]
terraform apply -var="notification_email=your-email@domain.com"
```

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and solutions:

1. **Permission Issues**

   - Verify your GCP credentials are properly set up
   - Ensure you have the required IAM roles
   - Check project permissions

2. **Deployment Failures**

   - Verify your terraform.tfvars configuration
   - Check Cloud Build logs
   - Ensure service account has necessary permissions

3. **Model Issues**
   - For mock model: Verify USE_MOCK_MODEL=true
   - For Vertex AI: Check endpoint ID and permissions

## Contributing

1. Create a feature branch:

```bash
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
```

2. Make your changes and test:

```bash
# Run tests
pytest
# Format code
black app/
# Check linting
flake8 app/
```

3. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Support

For support and questions:

- Create an issue in the GitHub repository

Commit message:

adds VS code settings for branch naming

README.md, after:

# Sign Language Translator

This project provides a sign language translation service using MediaPipe for keypoint extraction and a fine-tuned Whisper model deployed on Vertex AI. The service is deployed on Google Cloud Run and managed with Terraform.

## Documentation

- [Data Access and Dataset Information](app/docs/DATA.md)
- [Model Training Guide](app/docs/TRAINING.md)
- [Deployment Scenarios](app/docs/DEPLOYMENT.md)
- [GCP Project Setup Guide](app/docs/GCP_SETUP.md)

## Project Structure

```
sign-language-translator/
├── app/ # Application code
│ ├── config/ # Configuration files
│ ├── models/ # Model implementations
│ ├── scripts/ # Utility scripts
│ └── utils/ # Helper functions
├── terraform/ # Infrastructure as Code
│ ├── environments/ # Environment-specific configs
│ └── modules/ # Reusable Terraform modules
├── cloud-build/ # Cloud Build configurations
└── setup/ # Setup scripts
```

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.9+
  - Specific version requirements listed in requirements.txt
- Google Cloud SDK
  - Required permissions:
    - Organization viewer
    - Project creator
    - Billing account user
    - Service Account Admin
- Terraform >= 1.0.0
- Docker (optional for local container testing)
- Hugging Face account and access token (for production model)

For Linux users:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install python3-dev build-essential
```

## Environment Variables

Required environment variables:

- `PROJECT_ID`: Your Google Cloud project ID
- `REGION`: Default GCP region (e.g., europe-west3)
- `GITHUB_OWNER`: GitHub username or organization name
- `NOTIFICATION_EMAIL`: Email for monitoring alerts
- `USE_MOCK_MODEL`: Set to "true" for offline development
- `VERTEX_AI_ENDPOINT_ID`: Required when USE_MOCK_MODEL is "false"

## Development Setup

1. Initialize your development environment:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/sign-language-translator.git
cd sign-language-translator
# Run the development setup script
./setup/setup_dev_env.sh
```

2. Configure your environment:

```bash
# For offline development (using mock model)
export USE_MOCK_MODEL=true
# For online development (using Vertex AI)
export USE_MOCK_MODEL=false
export VERTEX_AI_ENDPOINT_ID=<your-endpoint-id>
```

3. Deploy a development model (if using Vertex AI):

```bash
python app/scripts/dev_model_deploy.py --project-id=your-project-id
```

4. Start the development server:

```bash
flask run --debug
```

### VS Code Setup

1. Install recommended extensions when prompted by VS Code
2. Sign in to GitHub when prompted by the GitHub Pull Requests and Issues extension
3. Workspace settings will automatically configure:
   - Standardized branch naming for issues
   - GitHub issue integration
   - Pull request management

## Deployment Scenarios

### Development

- Uses CPU-only resources
- Single replica deployment
- Mock model available for offline development
- Minimal compute resources for cost optimization

### Staging

- GPU-enabled endpoints
- Automated deployment via GitHub Actions
- Integration testing before promotion
- Scaled-down production configuration

### Production

- Full GPU resources
- Multiple replicas for high availability
- Automated canary deployments
- Full monitoring and alerting

## Model Deployment

### Development

```bash
# Deploy development model
python app/scripts/dev_model_deploy.py --project-id=your-project-id
```

### Staging/Production

```bash
# Tag a new model version
git tag model/v1.0.0
git push origin model/v1.0.0
# GitHub Actions will automatically:
# 1. Deploy to staging
# 2. Run validation tests
# 3. Deploy to production if tests pass
```

## Infrastructure Setup

1. Copy the example variables file:

```bash
cd terraform/environments/dev
cp example.tfvars terraform.tfvars
```

2. Edit terraform.tfvars with your values

```hcl
project_id = "your-project-id"
region = "europe-west3"
```

3. Initialize and apply Terraform:

```bash
terraform init
terraform apply
```

## Monitoring Setup

The project includes monitoring configurations for different environments:

### Development

- Basic resource monitoring
- Error rate tracking
- Performance metrics

### Production

- Full monitoring suite
- Custom alerts
- Uptime checks
- Error tracking
- Performance monitoring

Configure monitoring by setting up notification channels:

```bash
cd terraform/environments/[env]
terraform apply -var="notification_email=your-email@domain.com"
```

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and solutions:

1. **Permission Issues**

   - Verify your GCP credentials are properly set up
   - Ensure you have the required IAM roles
   - Check project permissions

2. **Deployment Failures**

   - Verify your terraform.tfvars configuration
   - Check Cloud Build logs
   - Ensure service account has necessary permissions

3. **Model Issues**
   - For mock model: Verify USE_MOCK_MODEL=true
   - For Vertex AI: Check endpoint ID and permissions

## Contributing

1. Create a feature branch:

```bash
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
```

2. Make your changes and test:

```bash
# Run tests
pytest
# Format code
black app/
# Check linting
flake8 app/
```

3. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Support

For support and questions:

- Create an issue in the GitHub repository
